README.rst, before:

HAProxy Session Monitor
=======================

Overview
--------

The HAProxy Session Monitor is a simple Python 3-based application
(using the `asyncio <https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html>`__
native library in Python 3.4+) that polls one or more HAProxy instances'
stats endpoints for concurrent session data on HAProxy backends. So far,
there are several possible backends for monitoring:

1. Log file (local to machine)
2. Graylog (using
   `GELF <http://docs.graylog.org/en/stable/pages/gelf.html>`__)
3. `PRTG <https://www.paessler.com/prtg>`__ (*coming soon!*)

Requirements
------------

Only Python 3.5+ (ideally 3.6+) is required to run this software.

Installation
------------

In order to install the session monitor, it is recommended that one
install it into a virtual environment:

.. code:: bash

    # Where do you want to install the monitor?
    > cd /path/to/some/folder

    # Create a virtual environment using Python 3.6 in the current folder
    > python3.6 -m venv .

    # Activate the virtual environment
    > source bin/activate

    # Run the session monitor
    > haproxysessionmon -h

Running
-------

To run the application to monitor one or more HAProxy hosts, simply run
the following:

.. code:: bash

    > haproxysessionmon -c /path/to/config-file.yml

See the following section for details as to how to configure the session
monitor. At present, the application runs purely in the foreground (will
allow for easy Dockerisation).

Configuration
-------------

The HAProxy Session Monitor uses
`YAML <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>`__ for configuration.

Example
~~~~~~~

.. code:: yaml

    # Logging configuration
    logging:
        # Other possible options: INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL
        level: DEBUG
        # Full path to the output file to which to log (leave this option
        # out completely to avoid logging to a file)
        file: /var/log/haproxysessionmon.log
        # Should logging also go to the console?
        console: true

    # Backend configuration for storage of monitoring data
    backends:
        graylog1:
            type: gelf
            host: logbroker1.local
            port: 12201
            facility: haproxysm
        graylog2:
            type: gelf
            host: logbroker2.local
            port: 12201
            facility: haproxysm-secondary
        prtg1:
            type: prtg
            base-url: https://prtg.local/probe/
        logfile1:
            type: logfile
            path: /var/log/session-count.log

    # The HAProxy servers to monitor
    servers:
        # The ID of the following HAProxy server will be "lb-primary"
        lb-primary:
            # Full URL to the CSV endpoint to poll
            endpoint: "http://lb-primary:8080/haproxy?stats;csv"
            # Number of seconds between endpoint polling operations
            update-interval: 10
            # If this HAProxy instance requires basic authentication
            username: admin
            password: admin
            # To which backends should monitoring data be sent?
            backends:
                - graylog1
                - prtg1
        lb-secondary:
            endpoint: "http://lb-secondary:8080/haproxy?stats;csv"
            update-interval: 60
            backends:
                - graylog2
                - logfile1

Application Logging Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The HAProxy Session Monitor itself logs different levels of information,
and the **optional** ``logging`` section of the configuration file
allows one to specify the following configuration options:

-  ``level`` (optional): The Python log level to be logged. Valid
   options include ``DEBUG``, ``INFO``, ``WARNING``, ``ERROR`` and
   ``CRITICAL``. Default: ``INFO``.
-  ``file`` (optional): If specified, this will cause the application to
   write its logs to a local file in the file system. This must contain
   the full path to the log file, and the application must have write
   privileges to this file. Default: ``None``.
-  ``console`` (optional): If ``true``, application logs will also be
   output to ``stdout``. Default: ``true``.

Graylog Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At present, this backend (type: ``gelf``) allows you to pipe statistics
to a Graylog instance via UDP using
`GELF <http://docs.graylog.org/en/stable/pages/gelf.html>`__. The
following configuration options are possible for a Graylog backend:

-  ``host``: The host IP address for the collector endpoint.
-  ``port``: The host port for the collector endpoint.
-  ``facility``: A unique identifier for all of the statistics collected
   on behalf of this backend.

When this data is sent to the Graylog collector endpoint, the following
important fields are sent through:

-  ``host``: The ID of the HAProxy server for which these stats are
   relevant (this corresponds to the ID given to the server under the
   ``servers`` section of the configuration file.
-  ``facility``: The facility specified in the configuration for this
   particular backend.
-  ``sessions``: The integer value representing the number of concurrent
   sessions going through the HAProxy host being monitored.
-  ``backend``: The name given to the HAProxy backend (as configured in
   the HAProxy server itself) for which the concurrent session count is
   relevant.

PRTG Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend is currently still under construction, and should be
available soon.

Log File Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend (type: ``logfile``) allows you to append statistics to a
log file by way of simple logging. The following configuration options
are possible for the log file:

-  ``path``: The full filesystem path to the file to which to write the
   logs.

License
-------

**The MIT License (MIT)**

Copyright (c) 2017 Thane Thomson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

updating readme to reflect environment var config

README.rst, after:

HAProxy Session Monitor
=======================

Overview
--------

The HAProxy Session Monitor is a simple Python 3-based application
(using the `asyncio <https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html>`__
native library in Python 3.4+) that polls one or more HAProxy instances'
stats endpoints for concurrent session data on HAProxy backends. So far,
there are several possible backends for monitoring:

1. Log file (local to machine)
2. Graylog (using
   `GELF <http://docs.graylog.org/en/stable/pages/gelf.html>`__)
3. `PRTG <https://www.paessler.com/prtg>`__ (*coming soon!*)

Requirements
------------

Only Python 3.5+ (ideally 3.6+) is required to run this software.

Installation
------------

In order to install the session monitor, it is recommended that one
install it into a virtual environment:

.. code:: bash

    # Where do you want to install the monitor?
    > cd /path/to/some/folder

    # Create a virtual environment using Python 3.6 in the current folder
    > python3.6 -m venv .

    # Activate the virtual environment
    > source bin/activate

    # Run the session monitor
    > haproxysessionmon -h

Running
-------

To run the application to monitor one or more HAProxy hosts, simply run
the following:

.. code:: bash

    > haproxysessionmon -c /path/to/config-file.yml

Or, alternatively, to set the path to the configuration file in your
environment variables, simply do the following:

.. code:: bash

    > export HAPROXYSM_CONFIG_FILE=/path/to/config-file.yml
    > haproxysessionmon

See the following section for details as to how to configure the session
monitor. At present, the application runs purely in the foreground (will
allow for easy Dockerisation).

Configuration
-------------

The HAProxy Session Monitor uses
`YAML <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>`__ for configuration.

Example
~~~~~~~

.. code:: yaml

    # Logging configuration
    logging:
        # Other possible options: INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL
        level: DEBUG
        # Full path to the output file to which to log (leave this option
        # out completely to avoid logging to a file)
        file: /var/log/haproxysessionmon.log
        # Should logging also go to the console?
        console: true

    # Backend configuration for storage of monitoring data
    backends:
        graylog1:
            type: gelf
            host: logbroker1.local
            port: 12201
            facility: haproxysm
        graylog2:
            type: gelf
            host: logbroker2.local
            port: 12201
            facility: haproxysm-secondary
        prtg1:
            type: prtg
            base-url: https://prtg.local/probe/
        logfile1:
            type: logfile
            path: /var/log/session-count.log

    # The HAProxy servers to monitor
    servers:
        # The ID of the following HAProxy server will be "lb-primary"
        lb-primary:
            # Full URL to the CSV endpoint to poll
            endpoint: "http://lb-primary:8080/haproxy?stats;csv"
            # Number of seconds between endpoint polling operations
            update-interval: 10
            # If this HAProxy instance requires basic authentication
            username: admin
            password: admin
            # To which backends should monitoring data be sent?
            backends:
                - graylog1
                - prtg1
        lb-secondary:
            endpoint: "http://lb-secondary:8080/haproxy?stats;csv"
            update-interval: 60
            backends:
                - graylog2
                - logfile1

Application Logging Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The HAProxy Session Monitor itself logs different levels of information,
and the **optional** ``logging`` section of the configuration file
allows one to specify the following configuration options:

-  ``level`` (optional): The Python log level to be logged. Valid
   options include ``DEBUG``, ``INFO``, ``WARNING``, ``ERROR`` and
   ``CRITICAL``. Default: ``INFO``.
-  ``file`` (optional): If specified, this will cause the application to
   write its logs to a local file in the file system. This must contain
   the full path to the log file, and the application must have write
   privileges to this file. Default: ``None``.
-  ``console`` (optional): If ``true``, application logs will also be
   output to ``stdout``. Default: ``true``.

Graylog Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At present, this backend (type: ``gelf``) allows you to pipe statistics
to a Graylog instance via UDP using
`GELF <http://docs.graylog.org/en/stable/pages/gelf.html>`__. The
following configuration options are possible for a Graylog backend:

-  ``host``: The host IP address for the collector endpoint.
-  ``port``: The host port for the collector endpoint.
-  ``facility``: A unique identifier for all of the statistics collected
   on behalf of this backend.

When this data is sent to the Graylog collector endpoint, the following
important fields are sent through:

-  ``host``: The ID of the HAProxy server for which these stats are
   relevant (this corresponds to the ID given to the server under the
   ``servers`` section of the configuration file.
-  ``facility``: The facility specified in the configuration for this
   particular backend.
-  ``sessions``: The integer value representing the number of concurrent
   sessions going through the HAProxy host being monitored.
-  ``backend``: The name given to the HAProxy backend (as configured in
   the HAProxy server itself) for which the concurrent session count is
   relevant.

PRTG Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend is currently still under construction, and should be
available soon.

Log File Backend Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This backend (type: ``logfile``) allows you to append statistics to a
log file by way of simple logging. The following configuration options
are possible for the log file:

-  ``path``: The full filesystem path to the file to which to write the
   logs.

License
-------

**The MIT License (MIT)**

Copyright (c) 2017 Thane Thomson

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
